Barbarian
Core Barbarian Traits
Primary Ability	Strength
Hit Point Die	D12 per Barbarian level
Saving Throw Proficiencies	Strength and Constitution
Skill Proficiencies	Choose 2: Animal Handling, Athletics, Intimidation, Nature, Perception, or Survival
Weapon Proficiencies	Simple and Martial weapons
Armor Training	Light and Medium armor and Shields
Starting Equipment	Choose A or B: (A) Greataxe, 4 Handaxes, Explorer’s Pack, and 15 GP; or (B) 75 GP
Barbarians are mighty warriors who are powered by primal forces of the multiverse that manifest as a Rage. More than a mere emotion—and not limited to anger—this Rage is an incarnation of a predator’s ferocity, a storm’s fury, and a sea’s turmoil.

Some Barbarians personify their Rage as a fierce spirit or revered forebear. Others see it as a connection to the pain and anguish of the world, as an impersonal tangle of wild magic, or as an expression of their own deepest self. For every Barbarian, their Rage is a power that fuels not just battle prowess, but also uncanny reflexes and heightened senses.

Barbarians often serve as protectors and leaders in their communities. They charge headlong into danger so those under their protection don’t have to. Their courage in the face of danger makes Barbarians perfectly suited for adventure.

Becoming a Barbarian...
As a Level 1 Character
Gain all the traits in the Core Barbarian Traits table.
Gain the Barbarian’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Barbarian Features table.
As a Multiclass Character
Gain the following traits from the Core Barbarian Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency with Martial weapons, and training with Shields.
Gain the Barbarian’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Barbarian Features table.
Barbarian Class Features
As a Barbarian, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Barbarian levels. These features are listed in the Barbarian Features table.

Barbarian Features
Level	Proficiency Bonus	Class Features	Rages	Rage Damage	Weapon Mastery
1	+2	Rage, Unarmored Defense, Weapon Mastery	2	+2	2
2	+2	Danger Sense, Reckless Attack	2	+2	2
3	+2	Barbarian Subclass, Primal Knowledge	3	+2	2
4	+2	Ability Score Improvement	3	+2	3
5	+3	Extra Attack, Fast Movement	3	+2	3

Level 1: Rage
You can imbue yourself with a primal power called Rage, a force that grants you extraordinary might and resilience. You can enter it as a Bonus Action if you aren’t wearing Heavy armor.

You can enter your Rage the number of times shown for your Barbarian level in the Rages column of the Barbarian Features table. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

While active, your Rage follows the rules below.

Damage Resistance. You have Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage.

Rage Damage. When you make an attack using Strength—with either a weapon or an Unarmed Strike—and deal damage to the target, you gain a bonus to the damage that increases as you gain levels as a Barbarian, as shown in the Rage Damage column of the Barbarian Features table.

Strength Advantage. You have Advantage on Strength checks and Strength saving throws.

No Concentration or Spells. You can’t maintain Concentration, and you can’t cast spells.

Duration. The Rage lasts until the end of your next turn, and it ends early if you don Heavy armor or have the Incapacitated condition. If your Rage is still active on your next turn, you can extend the Rage for another round by doing one of the following:

Make an attack roll against an enemy.
Force an enemy to make a saving throw.
Take a Bonus Action to extend your Rage.
Each time the Rage is extended, it lasts until the end of your next turn. You can maintain a Rage for up to 10 minutes.

Level 1: Unarmored Defense
While you aren’t wearing any armor, your base Armor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity and Constitution modifiers. You can use a Shield and still gain this benefit.

Level 1: Weapon Mastery
Your training with weapons allows you to use the mastery properties of two kinds of Simple or Martial Melee weapons of your choice, such as Greataxes and Handaxes. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can practice weapon drills and change one of those weapon choices.

When you reach certain Barbarian levels, you gain the ability to use the mastery properties of more kinds of weapons, as shown in the Weapon Mastery column of the Barbarian Features table.

Level 2: Danger Sense
You gain an uncanny sense of when things aren’t as they should be, giving you an edge when you dodge perils. You have Advantage on Dexterity saving throws unless you have the Incapacitated condition.

Level 2: Reckless Attack
You can throw aside all concern for defense to attack with increased ferocity. When you make your first attack roll on your turn, you can decide to attack recklessly. Doing so gives you Advantage on attack rolls using Strength until the start of your next turn, but attack rolls against you have Advantage during that time.

Level 3: Barbarian Subclass
You gain a Barbarian subclass of your choice. The Path of the Berserker subclass is detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Barbarian levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Barbarian level or lower.

Level 3: Primal Knowledge
You gain proficiency in another skill of your choice from the skill list available to Barbarians at level 1.

In addition, while your Rage is active, you can channel primal power when you attempt certain tasks; whenever you make an ability check using one of the following skills, you can make it as a Strength check even if it normally uses a different ability: Acrobatics, Intimidation, Perception, Stealth, or Survival. When you use this ability, your Strength represents primal power coursing through you, honing your agility, bearing, and senses.

Level 4: Ability Score Improvement
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see “Feats”) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Barbarian levels 8, 12, and 16.

Level 5: Extra Attack
You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

Level 5: Fast Movement
Your speed increases by 10 feet while you aren’t wearing Heavy armor.

Barbarian Subclass
A Barbarian subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Barbarian levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Path of the Berserker subclass.

Path of the Berserker
Channel Rage into Violent Fury

Barbarians who walk the Path of the Berserker direct their Rage primarily toward violence. Their path is one of untrammeled fury, and they thrill in the chaos of battle as they allow their Rage to seize and empower them.

Level 3: Frenzy
If you use Reckless Attack while your Rage is active, you deal extra damage to the first target you hit on your turn with a Strength-based attack. To determine the extra damage, roll a number of d6s equal to your Rage Damage bonus, and add them together. The damage has the same type as the weapon or Unarmed Strike used for the attack.

Bard
Core Bard Traits
Primary Ability	Charisma
Hit Point Die	D8 per Bard level
Saving Throw Proficiencies	Dexterity and Charisma
Skill Proficiencies	Choose any 3 skills (see “Playing the Game”)
Weapon Proficiencies	Simple weapons
Tool Proficiencies	Choose 3 Musical Instruments (see “Equipment”)
Armor Training	Light armor
Starting Equipment	Choose A or B: (A) Leather Armor, 2 Daggers, Musical Instrument of your choice, Entertainer’s Pack, and 19 GP; or (B) 90 GP
Invoking magic through music, dance, and verse, Bards are expert at inspiring others, soothing hurts, disheartening foes, and creating illusions. Bards believe the multiverse was spoken into existence and that remnants of its Words of Creation still resound and glimmer on every plane of existence. Bardic magic attempts to harness those words, which transcend any language.

Anything can inspire a new song or tale, so Bards are fascinated by almost everything. They become masters of many things, including performing music, working magic, and making jests.

A Bard’s life is spent traveling, gathering lore, telling stories, and living on the gratitude of audiences, much like any other entertainer. But Bards’ depth of knowledge and mastery of magic sets them apart.

Becoming a Bard...
As a Level 1 Bard
Gain all the traits in the Core Bard Traits table.
Gain the Bard’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Bard Features table.
As a Multiclass Bard
Gain the following traits from the Core Bard Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency in one skill of your choice, proficiency with one Musical Instrument of your choice, and training with Light armor.
Gain the Bard’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Bard Features table. See the multiclassing rules in “Creating a Character” to determine your available spell slots.
Bard Class Features
As a Bard, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Bard levels. These features are listed in the Bard Features table.

Bard Features
——Spell Slots per Spell Level——
Level	Proficiency Bonus	Class Features	Bardic Die	Cantrips	Prepared Spells	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9
1	+2	Bardic Inspiration, Spellcasting	D6	2	4	2	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
2	+2	Expertise, Jack of All Trades	D6	2	5	3	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
3	+2	Bard Subclass	D6	2	6	4	2	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
4	+2	Ability Score Improvement	D6	3	7	4	3	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
5	+3	Font of Inspiration	D8	3	9	4	3	2	—	—	—	—	—	—

Level 1: Bardic Inspiration
You can supernaturally inspire others through words, music, or dance. This inspiration is represented by your Bardic Inspiration die, which is a d6.

Using Bardic Inspiration. As a Bonus Action, you can inspire another creature within 60 feet of yourself who can see or hear you. That creature gains one of your Bardic Inspiration dice. A creature can have only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time.

Once within the next hour when the creature fails a D20 Test, the creature can roll the Bardic Inspiration die and add the number rolled to the d20, potentially turning the failure into a success. A Bardic Inspiration die is expended when it’s rolled.

Number of Uses. You can confer a Bardic Inspiration die a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

At Higher Levels. Your Bardic Inspiration die changes when you reach certain Bard levels, as shown in the Bardic Die column of the Bard Features table. The die becomes a d8 at level 5, a d10 at level 10, and a d12 at level 15.

Level 1: Spellcasting
You have learned to cast spells through your bardic arts. See “Spells” for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Bard spells, which appear in the Bard spell list later in the class’s description.

Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from the Bard spell list. Dancing Lights and Vicious Mockery are recommended.

Whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Bard spell list.

When you reach Bard levels 4 and 10, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Bard spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Bard Features table.

Spell Slots. The Bard Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest.

Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from the Bard spell list. Charm Person, Color Spray, Dissonant Whispers, and Healing Word are recommended.

The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Bard levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Bard Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Bard spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a level 3 Bard, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination.

If another Bard feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Bard spells for you.

Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Bard spell for which you have spell slots.

Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your Bard spells.

Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Musical Instrument as a Spellcasting Focus for your Bard spells.

Level 2: Expertise
You gain Expertise (see the rules glossary) in two of your skill proficiencies of your choice. Performance and Persuasion are recommended if you have proficiency in them.

At Bard level 9, you gain Expertise in two more of your skill proficiencies of your choice.

Level 2: Jack of All Trades
You can add half your Proficiency Bonus (round down) to any ability check you make that uses a skill proficiency you lack and that doesn’t otherwise use your Proficiency Bonus.

For example, if you make a Strength (Athletics) check and lack Athletics proficiency, you can add half your Proficiency Bonus to the check.

A Bard’s Repertoire

Does your Bard beat a drum while chanting the deeds of ancient heroes? Strum a lute while crooning romantic tunes? Perform arias of stirring power? Recite dramatic monologues from classic tragedies? Use the rhythm of a folk dance to coordinate the movement of allies in battle? Compose naughty limericks?

When you play a Bard, consider the style of artistic performance you favor, the moods you might invoke, and the themes that inspire your own creations. Are your poems inspired by moments of natural beauty, or are they brooding reflections on loss? Do you prefer lofty hymns or rowdy tavern songs? Are you drawn to laments for the fallen or celebrations of joy? Do you dance merry jigs or perform elaborate interpretive choreography? Do you focus on one style of performance or strive to master them all?

Level 3: Bard Subclass
You gain a Bard subclass of your choice. The College of Lore subclass is detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Bard levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Bard level or lower.

Level 4: Ability Score Improvement
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see “Feats”) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Bard levels 8, 12, and 16.

Level 5: Font of Inspiration
You now regain all your expended uses of Bardic Inspiration when you finish a Short or Long Rest.

In addition, you can expend a spell slot (no action required) to regain one expended use of Bardic Inspiration.

Bard Subclass
A Bard subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Bard levels, as specified in the subclass. Bards form loose associations, which they call colleges, to preserve their traditions. This section presents the College of Lore subclass.

College of Lore
Plumb the Depths of Magical Knowledge

Bards of the College of Lore collect spells and secrets from diverse sources, such as scholarly tomes, mystical rites, and peasant tales. The college’s members gather in libraries and universities to share their lore with one another. They also meet at festivals or affairs of state, where they can expose corruption, unravel lies, and poke fun at self-important figures of authority.

Level 3: Bonus Proficiencies
You gain proficiency with three skills of your choice.

Level 3: Cutting Words
You learn to use your wit to supernaturally distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and competence of others. When a creature that you can see within 60 feet of yourself makes a damage roll or succeeds on an ability check or attack roll, you can take a Reaction to expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration; roll your Bardic Inspiration die, and subtract the number rolled from the creature’s roll, reducing the damage or potentially turning the success into a failure.

Cleric
Core Cleric Traits
Primary Ability	Wisdom
Hit Point Die	D8 per Cleric level
Saving Throw Proficiencies	Wisdom and Charisma
Skill Proficiencies	Choose 2: History, Insight, Medicine, Persuasion, or Religion
Weapon Proficiencies	Simple weapons
Armor Training	Light and Medium armor and Shields
Starting Equipment	Choose A or B: (A) Chain Shirt, Shield, Mace, Holy Symbol, Priest’s Pack, and 7 GP; or (B) 110 GP
Clerics draw power from the realms of the gods and harness it to work miracles. Blessed by a deity, a pantheon, or another immortal entity, a Cleric can reach out to the divine magic of the Outer Planes—where gods dwell—and channel it to bolster people and battle foes.

Because their power is a divine gift, Clerics typically associate themselves with temples dedicated to the deity or other immortal force that unlocked their magic. Harnessing divine magic doesn’t rely on specific training, yet Clerics might learn prayers and rites that help them draw on power from the Outer Planes.

Not every member of a temple or shrine is a Cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life of temple service, carrying out their devotion through prayer and rituals, not through magic. Many mortals claim to speak for the gods, but few can marshal the power of those gods the way a Cleric can.

Becoming a Cleric...
As a Level 1 Cleric
Gain all the traits in the Core Cleric Traits table.
Gain the Cleric’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Cleric Features table.
As a Multiclass Cleric
Gain the following traits from the Core Cleric Traits table: Hit Point Die and training with Light and Medium armor and Shields.
Gain the Cleric’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Cleric Features table. See the multiclassing rules in “Creating a Character” to determine your available spell slots.
Cleric Class Features
As a Cleric, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Cleric levels. These features are listed in the Cleric Features table.

Cleric Features
——Spell Slots per Spell Level——
Level	Proficiency Bonus	Class Features	Channel Divinity	Cantrips	Prepared Spells	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9
1	+2	Spellcasting, Divine Order	—	3	4	2	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
2	+2	Channel Divinity	2	3	5	3	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
3	+2	Cleric Subclass	2	3	6	4	2	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
4	+2	Ability Score Improvement	2	4	7	4	3	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
5	+3	Sear Undead	2	4	9	4	3	2	—	—	—	—	—	—

Level 1: Spellcasting
You have learned to cast spells through prayer and meditation. See “Spells” for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Cleric spells, which appear on the Cleric spell list later in the class’s description.

Cantrips. You know three cantrips of your choice from the Cleric spell list. Guidance, Sacred Flame, and Thaumaturgy are recommended.

Whenever you gain a Cleric level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Cleric spell list.

When you reach Cleric levels 4 and 10, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Cleric spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Cleric Features table.

Spell Slots. The Cleric Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest.

Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from the Cleric spell list. Bless, Cure Wounds, Guiding Bolt, and Shield of Faith are recommended.

The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Cleric levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Cleric Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Cleric spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a level 3 Cleric, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination.

If another Cleric feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Cleric spells for you.

Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of prepared spells, replacing any of the spells there with other Cleric spells for which you have spell slots.

Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your Cleric spells.

Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Holy Symbol as a Spellcasting Focus for your Cleric spells.

Level 1: Divine Order
You have dedicated yourself to one of the following sacred roles of your choice.

Protector. Trained for battle, you gain proficiency with Martial weapons and training with Heavy armor.

Thaumaturge. You know one extra cantrip from the Cleric spell list. In addition, your mystical connection to the divine gives you a bonus to your Intelligence (Arcana or Religion) checks. The bonus equals your Wisdom modifier (minimum of +1).

Level 2: Channel Divinity
You can channel divine energy directly from the Outer Planes to fuel magical effects. You start with two such effects: Divine Spark and Turn Undead, each of which is described below. Each time you use this class’s Channel Divinity, choose which Channel Divinity effect from this class to create. You gain additional effect options at higher Cleric levels.

You can use this class’s Channel Divinity twice. You regain one of its expended uses when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You gain additional uses when you reach certain Cleric levels, as shown in the Channel Divinity column of the Cleric Features table.

If a Channel Divinity effect requires a saving throw, the DC equals the spell save DC from this class’s Spellcasting feature.

Divine Spark. As a Magic action, you point your Holy Symbol at another creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself and focus divine energy at it. Roll 1d8 and add your Wisdom modifier. You either restore Hit Points to the creature equal to that total or force the creature to make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes Necrotic or Radiant damage (your choice) equal to that total. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage (round down).

You roll an additional d8 when you reach Cleric levels 7 (2d8), 13 (3d8), and 18 (4d8).

Turn Undead. As a Magic action, you present your Holy Symbol and censure Undead creatures. Each Undead of your choice within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom saving throw. If the creature fails its save, it has the Frightened and Incapacitated conditions for 1 minute. For that duration, it tries to move as far from you as it can on its turns. This effect ends early on the creature if it takes any damage, if you have the Incapacitated condition, or if you die.

Level 3: Cleric Subclass
You gain a Cleric subclass of your choice. The Life Domain subclass is detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Cleric levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Cleric level or lower.

Level 4: Ability Score Improvement
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see “Feats”) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Cleric levels 8, 12, and 16.

Level 5: Sear Undead
Whenever you use Turn Undead, you can roll a number of d8s equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1d8) and add the rolls together. Each Undead that fails its saving throw against that use of Turn Undead takes Radiant damage equal to the roll’s total. This damage doesn’t end the turn effect.
Cleric Subclass
A Cleric subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Cleric levels, as specified in the subclass. Each Cleric subclass is named after a domain of existence that is favored by a god, pantheon, or religious order. This section presents the Life Domain subclass.

Life Domain
Soothe the Hurts of the World

The Life Domain focuses on the positive energy that helps sustain all life in the multiverse. Clerics who tap into this domain are masters of healing, using that life force to cure many hurts.

Existence itself relies on the positive energy associated with this domain, so a Cleric of almost any religious tradition might choose it. This domain is particularly associated with agricultural deities, gods of healing or endurance, and gods of home and community. Religious orders of healing also seek the magic of this domain.

Level 3: Disciple of Life
When a spell you cast with a spell slot restores Hit Points to a creature, that creature regains additional Hit Points on the turn you cast the spell. The additional Hit Points equal 2 plus the spell slot’s level.

Level 3: Life Domain Spells
Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Life Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared.

Life Domain Spells
Cleric Level	Prepared Spells
3	Aid, Bless, Cure Wounds, Lesser Restoration
5	Mass Healing Word, Revivify
7	Aura of Life, Death Ward
9	Greater Restoration, Mass Cure Wounds
Level 3: Preserve Life
As a Magic action, you present your Holy Symbol and expend a use of your Channel Divinity to evoke healing energy that can restore a number of Hit Points equal to five times your Cleric level. Choose Bloodied creatures within 30 feet of yourself (which can include you), and divide those Hit Points among them. This feature can restore a creature to no more than half its Hit Point maximum.

Druid
Core Druid Traits
Primary Ability	Wisdom
Hit Point Die	D8 per Druid level
Saving Throw Proficiencies	Intelligence and Wisdom
Skill Proficiencies	Choose 2: Arcana, Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception, Religion, or Survival
Weapon Proficiencies	Simple weapons
Tool Proficiencies	Herbalism Kit
Armor Training	Light armor and Shields
Starting Equipment	Choose A or B: (A) Leather Armor, Shield, Sickle, Druidic Focus (Quarterstaff), Explorer’s Pack, Herbalism Kit, and 9 GP; or (B) 50 GP
Druids belong to ancient orders that call on the forces of nature. Harnessing the magic of animals, plants, and the four elements, Druids heal, transform into animals, and wield elemental destruction.

Revering nature above all, individual Druids gain their magic from nature, a nature deity, or both, and they typically unite with other Druids to perform rites that mark the passage of the seasons and other natural cycles.

Druids are concerned with the delicate ecological balance that sustains plant and animal life and with the need for people to live in harmony with nature. Druids often guard sacred sites or watch over regions of unspoiled nature, but when a significant danger arises, Druids take a more active role as adventurers who combat the threat.

Becoming a Druid...
As a Level 1 Druid
Gain all the traits in the Core Druid Traits table.
Gain the Druid’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Druid Features table.
As a Multiclass Druid
Gain the following traits from the Core Druid Traits table: Hit Point Die and training with Light armor and Shields.
Gain the Druid’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Druid Features table. See the multiclassing rules in “Creating a Character” to determine your available spell slots.
Druid Class Features
As a Druid, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Druid levels. These features are listed in the Druid Features table.

Druid Features
 	——Spell Slots per Spell Level——
Level	Proficiency Bonus	Class Features	Wild Shape	Cantrips	Prepared Spells	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9
1	+2	Spellcasting, Druidic, Primal Order	—	2	4	2	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
2	+2	Wild Shape, Wild Companion	2	2	5	3	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
3	+2	Druid Subclass	2	2	6	4	2	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
4	+2	Ability Score Improvement	2	3	7	4	3	—	—	—	—	—	—	—
5	+3	Wild Resurgence	2	3	9	4	3	2	—	—	—	—	—	—
Level 1: Spellcasting
You have learned to cast spells through studying the mystical forces of nature. See “Spells” for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Druid spells, which appear on the Druid spell list later in the class’s description.

Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from the Druid spell list. Druidcraft and Produce Flame are recommended.

Whenever you gain a Druid level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Druid spell list.

When you reach Druid levels 4 and 10, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Druid spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Druid Features table.

Spell Slots. The Druid Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest.

Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from the Druid spell list. Animal Friendship, Cure Wounds, Faerie Fire, and Thunderwave are recommended.

The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Druid levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Druid Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Druid spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you’re a level 3 Druid, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination.

If another Druid feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don’t count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Druid spells for you.

Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of prepared spells, replacing any of the spells with other Druid spells for which you have spell slots.

Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your Druid spells.

Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Druid spells.

Level 1: Druidic
You know Druidic, the secret language of Druids. While learning this ancient tongue, you also unlocked the magic of communicating with animals; you always have the Speak with Animals spell prepared.

You can use Druidic to leave hidden messages. You and others who know Druidic automatically spot such a message. Others spot the message’s presence with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check but can’t decipher it without magic.

Level 1: Primal Order
You have dedicated yourself to one of the following sacred roles of your choice.

Magician. You know one extra cantrip from the Druid spell list. In addition, your mystical connection to nature gives you a bonus to your Intelligence (Arcana or Nature) checks. The bonus equals your Wisdom modifier (minimum bonus of +1).

Warden. Trained for battle, you gain proficiency with Martial weapons and training with Medium armor.

Level 2: Wild Shape
The power of nature allows you to assume the form of an animal. As a Bonus Action, you shape-shift into a Beast form that you have learned for this feature (see “Known Forms” below). You stay in that form for a number of hours equal to half your Druid level or until you use Wild Shape again, have the Incapacitated condition, or die. You can also leave the form early as a Bonus Action.

Number of Uses. You can use Wild Shape twice. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

You gain additional uses when you reach certain Druid levels, as shown in the Wild Shape column of the Druid Features table.

Known Forms. You know four Beast forms for this feature, chosen from among Beast stat blocks that have a maximum Challenge Rating of 1/4 and that lack a Fly Speed (see appendix B for stat block options). The Rat, Riding Horse, Spider, and Wolf are recommended. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one of your known forms with another eligible form.

When you reach certain Druid levels, your number of known forms and the maximum Challenge Rating for those forms increases, as shown in the Beast Shapes table. In addition, starting at level 8, you can adopt a form that has a Fly Speed.

When choosing known forms, you may look in the Monster Manual or elsewhere for eligible Beasts if the Dungeon Master permits you to do so.

Beast Shapes
Druid Level	Known Forms	Max CR	Fly Speed
2	4	1/4	No
4	6	1/2	No
8	8	1	Yes
Rules While Shape-Shifted. While in a form, you retain your personality, memories, and ability to speak, and the following rules apply:

Temporary Hit Points. When you assume a Wild Shape form, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your Druid level.

Game Statistics. Your game statistics are replaced by the Beast’s stat block, but you retain your creature type; Hit Points; Hit Point Dice; Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores; class features; languages; and feats. You also retain your skill and saving throw proficiencies and use your Proficiency Bonus for them, in addition to gaining the proficiencies of the creature. If a skill or saving throw modifier in the Beast’s stat block is higher than yours, use the one in the stat block.

No Spellcasting. You can’t cast spells, but shape-shifting doesn’t break your Concentration or otherwise interfere with a spell you’ve already cast.

Objects. Your ability to handle objects is determined by the form’s limbs rather than your own. In addition, you choose whether your equipment falls in your space, merges into your new form, or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as normal, but the DM decides whether it’s practical for the new form to wear a piece of equipment based on the creature’s size and shape. Your equipment doesn’t change size or shape to match the new form, and any equipment that the new form can’t wear must either fall to the ground or merge with the form. Equipment that merges with the form has no effect while you’re in that form.

Level 2: Wild Companion
You can summon a nature spirit that assumes an animal form to aid you. As a Magic action, you can expend a spell slot or a use of Wild Shape to cast the Find Familiar spell without Material components.

When you cast the spell in this way, the familiar is Fey and disappears when you finish a Long Rest.

Level 3: Druid Subclass
You gain a Druid subclass of your choice. The Circle of the Land subclass is detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Druid levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Druid level or lower.

Level 4: Ability Score Improvement
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see “Feats”) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Druid levels 8, 12, and 16.

Level 5: Wild Resurgence
Once on each of your turns, if you have no uses of Wild Shape left, you can give yourself one use by expending a spell slot (no action required).

In addition, you can expend one use of Wild Shape (no action required) to give yourself a level 1 spell slot, but you can’t do so again until you finish a Long Rest.
Druid Subclass
A Druid subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Druid levels, as specified in the subclass. Druids form loose associations, which they call circles. This section presents the Circle of the Land subclass.

Circle of the Land
Celebrate Connection to the Natural World

The Circle of the Land comprises mystics and sages who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites. These Druids meet within sacred circles of trees or standing stones to whisper primal secrets in Druidic. The circle’s wisest members preside as the chief priests of their communities.

Level 3: Circle of the Land Spells
Whenever you finish a Long Rest, choose one type of land: arid, polar, temperate, or tropical. Consult the table below that corresponds to the chosen type; you have the spells listed for your Druid level and lower prepared.

Arid Land
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3	Blur, Burning Hands, Fire Bolt
5	Fireball
7	Blight
9	Wall of Stone
Polar Land
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3	Fog Cloud, Hold Person, Ray of Frost
5	Sleet Storm
7	Ice Storm
9	Cone of Cold
Temperate Land
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3	Misty Step, Shocking Grasp, Sleep
5	Lightning Bolt
7	Freedom of Movement
9	Tree Stride
Tropical Land
Druid Level	Circle Spells
3	Acid Splash, Ray of Sickness, Web
5	Stinking Cloud
7	Polymorph
9	Insect Plague
Level 3: Land’s Aid
As a Magic action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape and choose a point within 60 feet of yourself. Vitality-giving flowers and life-draining thorns appear for a moment in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered on that point. Each creature of your choice in the Sphere must make a Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC, taking 2d6 Necrotic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. One creature of your choice in that area regains 2d6 Hit Points.

The damage and healing increase by 1d6 when you reach Druid levels 10 (3d6) and 14 (4d6).

Fighter
Core Fighter Traits
Primary Ability	Strength or Dexterity
Hit Point Die	D10 per Fighter level
Saving Throw Proficiencies	Strength and Constitution
Skill Proficiencies	Choose 2: Acrobatics, Animal Handling, Athletics, History, Insight, Intimidation, Persuasion, Perception, or Survival
Weapon Proficiencies	Simple and Martial weapons
Armor Training	Light, Medium, and Heavy armor and Shields
Starting Equipment	Choose A, B, or C: (A) Chain Mail, Greatsword, Flail, 8 Javelins, Dungeoneer’s Pack, and 4 GP; (B) Studded Leather Armor, Scimitar, Shortsword, Longbow, 20 Arrows, Quiver, Dungeoneer’s Pack, and 11 GP; or (C) 155 GP
Fighters rule many battlefields. Questing knights, royal champions, elite soldiers, and hardened mercenaries—as Fighters, they all share an unparalleled prowess with weapons and armor. And they are well acquainted with death, both meting it out and defying it.

Fighters master various weapon techniques, and a well-equipped Fighter always has the right tool at hand for any combat situation. Likewise, a Fighter is adept with every form of armor. Beyond that basic degree of familiarity, each Fighter specializes in certain styles of combat. Some concentrate on archery, some on fighting with two weapons at once, and some on augmenting their martial skills with magic. This combination of broad ability and extensive specialization makes Fighters superior combatants.

Becoming a Fighter...
As a Level 1 Fighter
Gain all the traits in the Core Fighter Traits table.
Gain the Fighter’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Fighter Features table.
As a Multiclass Fighter
Gain the following traits from the Core Fighter Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency with Martial weapons, and training with Light and Medium armor and Shields.
Gain the Fighter’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Fighter Features table.
Fighter Class Features
As a Fighter, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Fighter levels. These features are listed on the Fighter Features table.

Fighter Features
Level	Proficiency Bonus	Class Features	Second Wind	Weapon Mastery
1	+2	Fighting Style, Second Wind, Weapon Mastery	2	3
2	+2	Action Surge (one use), Tactical Mind	2	3
3	+2	Fighter Subclass	2	3
4	+2	Ability Score Improvement	3	4
5	+3	Extra Attack, Tactical Shift	3	4

Level 1: Fighting Style
You have honed your martial prowess and gain a Fighting Style feat of your choice (see “Feats”). Defense is recommended.

Whenever you gain a Fighter level, you can replace the feat you chose with a different Fighting Style feat.

Level 1: Second Wind
You have a limited well of physical and mental stamina that you can draw on. As a Bonus Action, you can use it to regain Hit Points equal to 1d10 plus your Fighter level.

You can use this feature twice. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest.

When you reach certain Fighter levels, you gain more uses of this feature, as shown in the Second Wind column of the Fighter Features table.

Level 1: Weapon Mastery
Your training with weapons allows you to use the mastery properties of three kinds of Simple or Martial weapons of your choice. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can practice weapon drills and change one of those weapon choices.

When you reach certain Fighter levels, you gain the ability to use the mastery properties of more kinds of weapons, as shown in the Weapon Mastery column of the Fighter Features table.

Level 2: Action Surge
You can push yourself beyond your normal limits for a moment. On your turn, you can take one additional action, except the Magic action.

Once you use this feature, you can’t do so again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. Starting at level 17, you can use it twice before a rest but only once on a turn.

Level 2: Tactical Mind
You have a mind for tactics on and off the battlefield. When you fail an ability check, you can expend a use of your Second Wind to push yourself toward success. Rather than regaining Hit Points, you roll 1d10 and add the number rolled to the ability check, potentially turning it into a success. If the check still fails, this use of Second Wind isn’t expended.

Level 3: Fighter Subclass
You gain a Fighter subclass of your choice. The Champion subclass is detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Fighter levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Fighter level or lower.

Level 4: Ability Score Improvement
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see “Feats”) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Fighter levels 6, 8, 12, 14, and 16.

Level 5: Extra Attack
You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.

Level 5: Tactical Shift
Whenever you activate your Second Wind with a Bonus Action, you can move up to half your Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks.
Fighter Subclass
A Fighter subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Fighter levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Champion subclass.

Champion
Pursue Physical Excellence in Combat

A Champion focuses on the development of martial prowess in a relentless pursuit of victory. Champions combine rigorous training with physical excellence to deal devastating blows, withstand peril, and garner glory. Whether in athletic contests or bloody battle, Champions strive for the crown of the victor.

Level 3: Improved Critical
Your attack rolls with weapons and Unarmed Strikes can score a Critical Hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20.

Level 3: Remarkable Athlete
Thanks to your athleticism, you have Advantage on Initiative rolls and Strength (Athletics) checks.

In addition, immediately after you score a Critical Hit, you can move up to half your Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks.
Core Monk Traits
Primary Ability	Dexterity and Wisdom
Hit Point Die	D8 per Monk level
Saving Throw Proficiencies	Strength and Dexterity
Skill Proficiencies	Choose 2: Acrobatics, Athletics, History, Insight, Religion, or Stealth
Weapon Proficiencies	Simple weapons and Martial weapons that have the Light property
Tool Proficiencies	Choose one type of Artisan’s Tools or Musical Instrument (see “Equipment”)
Armor Training	None
Starting Equipment	Choose A or B: (A) Spear, 5 Daggers, Artisan’s Tools or Musical Instrument chosen for the tool proficiency above, Explorer’s Pack, and 11 GP; or (B) 50 GP
Monks use rigorous combat training and mental discipline to align themselves with the multiverse and focus their internal reservoirs of power. Different Monks conceptualize this power in various ways: as breath, energy, life force, essence, or self, for example. Whether channeled as a striking display of martial prowess or as a subtler manifestation of defense and speed, this power infuses all that a Monk does.

Monks focus their internal power to create extraordinary, even supernatural, effects. They channel uncanny speed and strength into their attacks, with or without the use of weapons. In a Monk’s hands, even the most basic weapons can become sophisticated implements of combat mastery.

Many Monks find that a structured life of ascetic withdrawal helps them cultivate the physical and mental focus they need to harness their power. Other Monks believe that immersing themselves in the vibrant confusion of life helps to fuel their determination and discipline.

Monks generally view adventures as tests of their physical and mental development. They are driven by a desire to accomplish a greater mission than merely slaying monsters and plundering treasure; they strive to turn themselves into living weapons.

Becoming a Monk...
As a Level 1 Monk
Gain all the traits in the Core Monk Traits table.
Gain the Monk’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Monk Features table.
As a Multiclass Monk
Gain the Hit Point Die trait from the Core Monk Traits table.
Gain the Monk’s level 1 features, which are listed in the Monk Features table.
Monk Class Features
As a Monk, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Monk levels. These features are listed in the Monk Features table.

Monk Features
Level	Proficiency Bonus	Class Features	Martial Arts	Focus Points	Unarmored Movement
1	+2	Martial Arts, Unarmored Defense	1d6	—	—
2	+2	Monk’s Focus, Unarmored Movement, Uncanny Metabolism	1d6	2	+10 ft.
3	+2	Deflect Attacks, Monk Subclass	1d6	3	+10 ft.
4	+2	Ability Score Improvement, Slow Fall	1d6	4	+10 ft.
5	+3	Extra Attack, Stunning Strike	1d8	5	+10 ft.
Level 1: Martial Arts
Your practice of martial arts gives you mastery of combat styles that use your Unarmed Strike and Monk weapons, which are the following:

Simple Melee weapons
Martial Melee weapons that have the Light property
You gain the following benefits while you are unarmed or wielding only Monk weapons and you aren’t wearing armor or wielding a Shield.

Bonus Unarmed Strike. You can make an Unarmed Strike as a Bonus Action.

Martial Arts Die. You can roll 1d6 in place of the normal damage of your Unarmed Strike or Monk weapons. This die changes as you gain Monk levels, as shown in the Martial Arts column of the Monk Features table.

Dexterous Attacks. You can use your Dexterity modifier instead of your Strength modifier for the attack and damage rolls of your Unarmed Strikes and Monk weapons. In addition, when you use the Grapple or Shove option of your Unarmed Strike, you can use your Dexterity modifier instead of your Strength modifier to determine the save DC.

Level 1: Unarmored Defense
While you aren’t wearing armor or wielding a Shield, your base Armor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity and Wisdom modifiers.

Level 2: Monk’s Focus
Your focus and martial training allow you to harness a well of extraordinary energy within yourself. This energy is represented by Focus Points. Your Monk level determines the number of points you have, as shown in the Focus Points column of the Monk Features table.

You can expend these points to enhance or fuel certain Monk features. You start knowing three such features: Flurry of Blows, Patient Defense, and Step of the Wind, each of which is detailed below.

When you expend a Focus Point, it is unavailable until you finish a Short or Long Rest, at the end of which you regain all your expended points.

Some features that use Focus Points require your target to make a saving throw. The save DC equals 8 plus your Wisdom modifier and Proficiency Bonus.

Flurry of Blows. You can expend 1 Focus Point to make two Unarmed Strikes as a Bonus Action.

Patient Defense. You can take the Disengage action as a Bonus Action. Alternatively, you can expend 1 Focus Point to take both the Disengage and the Dodge actions as a Bonus Action.

Step of the Wind. You can take the Dash action as a Bonus Action. Alternatively, you can expend 1 Focus Point to take both the Disengage and Dash actions as a Bonus Action, and your jump distance is doubled for the turn.

Level 2: Unarmored Movement
Your speed increases by 10 feet while you aren’t wearing armor or wielding a Shield. This bonus increases when you reach certain Monk levels, as shown on the Monk Features table.

Level 2: Uncanny Metabolism
When you roll Initiative, you can regain all expended Focus Points. When you do so, roll your Martial Arts die, and regain a number of Hit Points equal to your Monk level plus the number rolled.

Once you use this feature, you can’t use it again until you finish a Long Rest.

Level 3: Deflect Attacks
When an attack roll hits you and its damage includes Bludgeoning, Piercing, or Slashing damage, you can take a Reaction to reduce the attack’s total damage against you. The reduction equals 1d10 plus your Dexterity modifier and Monk level.

If you reduce the damage to 0, you can expend 1 Focus Point to redirect some of the attack’s force. If you do so, choose a creature you can see within 5 feet of yourself if the attack was a melee attack or a creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself that isn’t behind Total Cover if the attack was a ranged attack. That creature must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take damage equal to two rolls of your Martial Arts die plus your Dexterity modifier. The damage is the same type dealt by the attack.

Level 3: Monk Subclass
You gain a Monk subclass of your choice. The Warrior of the Open Hand subclass is detailed after this class’s description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Monk levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass’s features that are of your Monk level or lower.

Level 4: Ability Score Improvement
You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see “Feats”) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Monk levels 8, 12, and 16.

Level 4: Slow Fall
You can take a Reaction when you fall to reduce any damage you take from the fall by an amount equal to five times your Monk level.

Level 5: Extra Attack
You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn.
Monk Subclass
A Monk subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Monk levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Warrior of the Open Hand subclass.

Warrior of the Open Hand
Master Unarmed Combat Techniques

Warriors of the Open Hand are masters of unarmed combat. They learn techniques to push and trip their opponents and manipulate their own energy to protect themselves from harm.

Level 3: Open Hand Technique
Whenever you hit a creature with an attack granted by your Flurry of Blows, you can impose one of the following effects on that target.

Addle. The target can’t make Opportunity Attacks until the start of its next turn.

Push. The target must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be pushed up to 15 feet away from you.

Topple. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition.
